---
title: confidence intervals, the random intervals
---

Lot of people, including me, is struggling with the concept (or definition) of confidence intervals. One possible explanation is that understanding confidence intervals requires some capacity of abstract thinking. In the frequentist world, a parameter is a fixed, deterministic number, while a random variable (such as the average) is, by definition, a function of the data (i.e. its value changes from one sample to another). This already explains the misconception that the confidence level set when building confidence intervals provides the probability of a the parameter being within the interval. Being the parameter a deterministic number, its value will either be covered or not by each of the generated confidence interval. This will happen with probability 1 or 0, respectively. So, thinking about the parameter as something sometimes falling between two numbers (i.e. the endpoints of the interval) and sometimes not is wrong. If we reverse this idea, so the endpoints of the confidence intervals sometimes cover the parameter, sometimes not, then we are on the good path. Why? Ask yourself how a confidence interval is generated: compute an estimate (e.g. the average), sum and subtract some value to/from it. Basically, the limits of this interval depend on an estimator, as each time we collect new data we will most likely get a new average. As a result, the limits of the interval are themselves random variables. So, the only thing that would change repeating the process of computing a confidence interval would be the endpoints of the interval (the parameter is fixed). Now, imagine we assume that the average we compute from the data is gaussian, meaning it fluctuates symmetrically around the parameter. Being gaussian also means that this average will be very far (e.g. at more than 2 standard errors from the mean) with a given frequency (1/40 at each tail). So, if we imagine to compute many averages from different set of data, these will fluctuate around the parameter and 1 each 20 will be at more than 2 standard errors from the parameter.  
